Loan Default Prediction - Project Milestone Report

The goal of this project is to find a model where we can predict whether a loan would be paid off in full or the loan needs to be charged off and possibly go default


Data set:

Collected data from the lending club :

Lending Club (LC) is the world’s largest online marketplace connecting borrowers and investors. It is transforming the banking system to make credit more affordable and investing more rewarding. Lending Club operates at a lower cost than traditional bank lending programs and pass the savings on to borrowers in the form of lower rates and to investors in the form of solid risk-adjusted returns. 

The information is available in 2 files.
1.	LOAN DATA  -  The ?le contains complete loan data for all loans issued through the time period stated, including the current loan status (Current, Late, Fully Paid, etc.) and latest payment information. 

2.	DECLINED LOAN DATA  - The ?le contains the list and details of all loan applications that did not meet Lending Club's credit underwriting policy. 



SUMMARY
A bank loan can provide numerous benefits, but it is a risk to both borrower and the lender. The lender runs the risk of lending you the money but not getting fully repaid. And as for borrower’s personal financial health, you can lose money or even your house. This is why lenders employ careful underwriting standards to minimize the risk for both parties.

The analysis of risk in bank loans need understanding what is the meaning of risk. In addition, the number of transactions in banking sector is rapidly growing and huge data volumes are available which represent  the customers behavior and the risks around loan are increased. 

The two most critical questions in the lending industry are: 
	1. How risky is the borrower? 
	2. Given the borrower’s risk, should we lend him/her? 


APPROACH:
1. Initial Data Exploration (Data Wrangling): 
	Analysis of Approved Loans
	1. Analysis on Loan Amount.
	2. Loan amount frequency distribution.
	3. Number of Loans over time.
	4. Average Loan Amount over time
	5. Relationship between Loan Amount and Loan status.
	6. Distributin of Loan Amount over Purpose
	7. Analysis on Interest Rate.
	8. Interest Rate Distribution
	9. Relationsip between Interest Rate and Term.

	Analysis of Probability Of Charge Off
	1. Relationship between Location and Probablitlity of Charge Off
	2. Relationship between Purpose and Probablitlity of Charge Off
	3. Relationship between Interest Rate and Probablitlity of Charge Off
	4. Relationship between Annual Income and Probablitlity of Charge Off
	5. Relationship between Grade/Sub-grade and Probablitlity of Charge Off
	6. Relationship between Employment Length and Probablitlity of Charge Off

	Analysis of Rejected loans and it's relation with Approved Loans.
	Questions we are trying to answer in our analysis.
		1. No of rejects over time? Increase/Decrease?
		2. DTI ratio of people getting most rejected loans and accepted loan.
		3. States where there are most rejected loans.
		4. Does Employment length has to do anything with rejection of loans?
		5. Frequency plot for Employment Length
		6. Based on the employment length, What is the appropiate loan amount people should apply for?
		7. No. of loans for each employment length.
		8. Relationship of Amount requested and employment length?


		Employed Python technologies to import and inspect the raw data, isolate relevant variables, calculate new variables, organize the dataframe, and resolve missing, invalid, corrupted or duplicate values.

2.  Dummy features (one-hot encoding)
3.  Build models – Logistic Regression, Classification Trees,  and Naive Bayes
4.  Deep Learning
5.  Model evaluation and comparison
6.  Make Predictions
 


Initial findings from EDA: 

Conclusion:
Top-5 Major variables to consider for loan prediction: 
1. Purpose of Loan 
2. Employment Length 
3. Grade 
4. Interest Rate 
5. Term



